
     The house they had taken in Hartford was the Hooker property on
     Forest Street, a handsome place in a distinctly literary
     neighborhood.  Harriet Beecher Stowe, Charles Dudley Warner, and
     other well-known writers were within easy walking distance; Twichell
     was perhaps half a mile away.

     It was the proper environment for Mark Twain.  He settled his little
     family there, and was presently at Redpath's office in Boston, which
     was a congenial place, as we have seen before.  He did not fail to
     return to the company of Nasby, Josh Billings, and those others of
     Redpath's "attractions" as long and as often as distance would
     permit.  Bret Harte, who by this time had won fame, was also in
     Boston now, and frequently, with Howells, Aldrich, and Mark Twain,
     gathered in some quiet restaurant corner for a luncheon that lasted
     through a dim winter afternoon--a period of anecdote, reminiscence,
     and mirth.  They were all young then, and laughed easily.  Howells,
     has written of one such luncheon given by Ralph Keeler, a young
     Californian--a gathering at which James T. Fields was present
     "Nothing remains to me of the happy time but a sense of idle and
     aimless and joyful talk-play, beginning and ending nowhere, of eager
     laughter, of countless good stories from Fields, of a heat-lightning
     shimmer of wit from Aldrich, of an occasional concentration of our
     joint mockeries upon our host, who took it gladly."

     But a lecture circuit cannot be restricted to the radius of Boston.
     Clemens was presently writing to Redpath from Washington and points
     farther west.


                       To James Redpath, in Boston:

                                   WASHINGTON, Tuesday, Oct. 28, 1871.
DEAR RED,--I have come square out, thrown "Reminiscences" overboard, and
taken "Artemus Ward, Humorist," for my subject.  Wrote it here on Friday
and Saturday, and read it from MS last night to an enormous house.  It
suits me and I'll never deliver the nasty, nauseous "Reminiscences" any
more.
                              Yours,
                                   MARK.


     The Artemus Ward lecture lasted eleven days, then he wrote:


                     To Redpath and Fall, in Boston:

                                   BUFFALO DEPOT, Dec. 8, 1871.
REDPATH & FALL, BOSTON,--Notify all hands that from this time I shall
talk nothing but selections from my forthcoming book "Roughing It."
Tried it last night.  Suits me tip-top.
                                   SAM'L L. CLEMENS.


     The Roughing It chapters proved a success, and continued in high
     favor through the rest of the season.


                       To James Redpath, in Boston:

                                   LOGANSPORT, IND.  Jan. 2, 1872.
FRIEND REDPATH,--Had a splendid time with a splendid audience in
Indianapolis last night--a perfectly jammed house, just as I have had all
the time out here.  I like the new lecture but I hate the "Artemus Ward"
talk and won't talk it any more.  No man ever approved that choice of
subject in my hearing, I think.

Give me some comfort.  If I am to talk in New York am I going to have a
good house?  I don't care now to have any appointments cancelled.  I'll
even "fetch" those Dutch Pennsylvanians with this lecture.

Have paid up $4000 indebtedness.  You are the, last on my list.  Shall
begin to pay you in a few days and then I shall be a free man again.
                              Yours,
                                        MARK.


     With his debts paid, Clemens was anxious to be getting home.  Two
     weeks following the above he wrote Redpath that he would accept no
     more engagements at any price, outside of New England, and added,
     "The fewer engagements I have from this time forth the better I
     shall be pleased."  By the end of February he was back in Hartford,
     refusing an engagement in Boston, and announcing to Redpath, "If I
     had another engagement I'd rot before I'd fill it."  From which we
     gather that he was not entirely happy in the lecture field.

     As a matter of fact, Mark Twain loathed the continuous travel and
     nightly drudgery of platform life.  He was fond of entertaining, and
     there were moments of triumph that repaid him for a good deal, but
     the tyranny of a schedule and timetables was a constant
     exasperation.

     Meantime, Roughing It had appeared and was selling abundantly.  Mark
     Twain, free of debt, and in pleasant circumstances, felt that the
     outlook was bright.  It became even more so when, in March, the
     second child, a little girl, Susy, was born, with no attending
     misfortunes.  But, then, in the early summer little Langdon died.
     It was seldom, during all of Mark Twain's life, that he enjoyed more
     than a brief period of unmixed happiness.

     It was in June of that year that Clemens wrote his first letter to
     William Dean Howells the first of several hundred that would follow
     in the years to come, and has in it something that is characteristic
     of nearly all the Clemens-Howells letters--a kind of tender
     playfulness that answered to something in Howells's make-up, his
     sense of humor, his wide knowledge of a humanity which he pictured
     so amusingly to the world.


                   To William Dean Howells, in Boston:

                                             HARTFORD, June 15, 1872.
FRIEND HOWELLS,--Could you tell me how I could get a copy of your
portrait as published in Hearth and Home?  I hear so much talk about it
as being among the finest works of art which have yet appeared in that
journal, that I feel a strong desire to see it.  Is it suitable for
framing?  I have written the publishers of H & H time and again, but they
say that the demand for the portrait immediately exhausted the edition
and now a copy cannot be had, even for the European demand, which has now
begun.  Bret Harte has been here, and says his family would not be
without that portrait for any consideration.  He says his children get up
in the night and yell for it.  I would give anything for a copy of that
portrait to put up in my parlor.  I have Oliver Wendell Holmes and Bret
Harte's, as published in Every Saturday, and of all the swarms that come
every day to gaze upon them none go away that are not softened and
humbled and made more resigned to the will of God.  If I had yours to put
up alongside of them, I believe the combination would bring more souls to
earnest reflection and ultimate conviction of their lost condition, than
any other kind of warning would.  Where in the nation can I get that
portrait?  Here are heaps of people that want it,--that need it.  There
is my uncle.  He wants a copy.  He is lying at the point of death.  He
has been lying at the point of death for two years.  He wants a copy--and
I want him to have a copy.  And I want you to send a copy to the man that
shot my dog.  I want to see if he is dead to every human instinct.

Now you send me that portrait.  I am sending you mine, in this letter;
and am glad to do it, for it has been greatly admired.  People who are
judges of art, find in the execution a grandeur which has not been
equalled in this country, and an expression which has not been approached
in any.
                                   Yrs truly,
                                             S. L. CLEMENS.

P. S.  62,000 copies of "Roughing It" sold and delivered in 4 months.


     The Clemens family did not spend the summer at Quarry Farm that
     year.  The sea air was prescribed for Mrs. Clemens and the baby, and
     they went to Saybrook, Connecticut, to Fenwick Hall.  Clemens wrote
     very little, though he seems to have planned Tom Sawyer, and perhaps
     made its earliest beginning, which was in dramatic form.

     His mind, however, was otherwise active.  He was always more or less
     given to inventions, and in his next letter we find a description of
     one which he brought to comparative perfection.

     He had also conceived the idea of another book of travel, and this
     was his purpose of a projected trip to England.


                      To Orion Clemens, in Hartford:

                                        FENWICK HALL, SAYBROOK, CONN.
                                        Aug. 11, 1872.
MY DEAR BRO.--I shall sail for England in the Scotia, Aug. 21.

But what I wish to put on record now, is my new invention--hence this
note, which you will preserve.  It is this--a self-pasting scrap-book
--good enough idea if some juggling tailor does not come along and ante-
date me a couple of months, as in the case of the elastic veststrap.

The nuisance of keeping a scrap-book is:  1.  One never has paste or gum
tragacanth handy;  2.  Mucilage won't stick, or stay, 4 weeks;
3.  Mucilage sucks out the ink and makes the scraps unreadable;
4.  To daub and paste 3 or 4 pages of scraps is tedious, slow, nasty and
tiresome.  My idea is this: Make a scrap-book with leaves veneered or
coated with gum-stickum of some kind; wet the page with sponge, brush,
rag or tongue, and dab on your scraps like postage stamps.

Lay on the gum in columns of stripes.

Each stripe of gum the length of say 20 ems, small pica, and as broad as
your finger; a blank about as broad as your finger between each 2
stripes--so in wetting the paper you need not wet any more of the gum
than your scrap or scraps will cover--then you may shut up the book and
the leaves won't stick together.

Preserve, also, the envelope of this letter--postmark ought to be good
evidence of the date of this great humanizing and civilizing invention.

I'll put it into Dan Slote's hands and tell him he must send you all over
America, to urge its use upon stationers and booksellers--so don't buy
into a newspaper.  The name of this thing is "Mark Twain's Self-Pasting
Scrapbook."

All well here.  Shall be up a P. M.  Tuesday.  Send the carriage.
                                   Yr Bro.
                                             S.  L.  CLEMENS.


     The Dan Slote of this letter is, of course, his old Quaker City
     shipmate, who was engaged in the blank-book business, the firm being
     Slote & Woodman, located at 119 and 121 William Street, New York.

