
     When Clemens had been platforming with Cable and returned to
     Hartford for his Christmas vacation, the Warner and Clemens families
     had joined in preparing for him a surprise performance of The Prince
     and the Pauper.  The Clemens household was always given to
     theatricals, and it was about this time that scenery and a stage
     were prepared--mainly by the sculptor Gerhardt--for these home
     performances, after which productions of The Prince and the Pauper
     were given with considerable regularity to audiences consisting of
     parents and invited friends.  The subject is a fascinating one, but
     it has been dwelt upon elsewhere.--[In Mark Twain: A Biography,
     chaps.  cliff and clx.]--We get a glimpse of one of these occasions
     as well as of Mark Twain's financial progress in the next brief
     note.

                       To W. D. Howells; in Boston:

                                                  Jan.  3, '86.
MY DEAR HOWELLS,--The date set for the Prince and Pauper play is ten
days hence--Jan. 13.  I hope you and Pilla can take a train that arrives
here during the day; the one that leaves Boston toward the end of the
afternoon would be a trifle late; the performance would have already
begun when you reached the house.

I'm out of the woods.  On the last day of the year I had paid out
$182,000 on the Grant book and it was totally free from debt.
                                        Yrs ever
                                                  MARK.


     Mark Twain's mother was a woman of sturdy character and with a keen
     sense of humor and tender sympathies.  Her husband, John Marshall
     Clemens, had been a man of high moral character, honored by all who
     knew him, respected and apparently loved by his wife.  No one would
     ever have supposed that during all her years of marriage, and almost
     to her death, she carried a secret romance that would only be told
     at last in the weary disappointment of old age.  It is a curious
     story, and it came to light in this curious way:


                       To W. D. Howells, in Boston:

                                        HARTFORD, May 19, '86.
MY DEAR HOWELLS,--..... Here's a secret.  A most curious and pathetic
romance, which has just come to light.  Read these things, but don't
mention them.  Last fall, my old mother--then 82--took a notion to attend
a convention of old settlers of the Mississippi Valley in an Iowa town.
My brother's wife was astonished; and represented to her the hardships
and fatigues of such a trip, and said my mother might possibly not even
survive them; and said there could be no possible interest for her in
such a meeting and such a crowd.  But my mother insisted, and persisted;
and finally gained her point.  They started; and all the way my mother
was young again with excitement, interest, eagerness, anticipation.  They
reached the town and the hotel.  My mother strode with the same eagerness
in her eye and her step, to the counter, and said:

"Is Dr. Barrett of St. Louis, here?"

"No.  He was here, but he returned to St. Louis this morning."

"Will he come again?"

"No."

My mother turned away, the fire all gone from her, and said, "Let us go
home."

They went straight back to Keokuk.  My mother sat silent and thinking for
many days--a thing which had never happened before.  Then one day she
said:

"I will tell you a secret.  When I was eighteen, a young medical student
named Barrett lived in Columbia (Ky.) eighteen miles away; and he used to
ride over to see me.  This continued for some time.  I loved him with my
whole heart, and I knew that he felt the same toward me, though no words
had been spoken.  He was too bashful to speak--he could not do it.
Everybody supposed we were engaged--took it for granted we were--but we
were not.  By and by there was to be a party in a neighboring town, and
he wrote my uncle telling him his feelings, and asking him to drive me
over in his buggy and let him (Barrett) drive me back, so that he might
have that opportunity to propose.  My uncle should have done as he was
asked, without explaining anything to me; but instead, he read me the
letter; and then, of course, I could not go--and did not.  He (Barrett)
left the country presently, and I, to stop the clacking tongues, and to
show him that I did not care, married, in a pet.  In all these sixty-four
years I have not seen him since.  I saw in a paper that he was going to
attend that Old Settlers' Convention.  Only three hours before we reached
that hotel, he had been standing there!"

Since then, her memory is wholly faded out and gone; and now she writes
letters to the school-mates who had been dead forty years, and wonders
why they neglect her and do not answer.

Think of her carrying that pathetic burden in her old heart sixty-four
years, and no human being ever suspecting it!
                              Yrs ever,
                                        MARK.

We do not get the idea from this letter that those two long ago
sweethearts quarreled, but Mark Twain once spoke of their having done so,
and there may have been a disagreement, assuming that there was a
subsequent meeting.  It does not matter, now.  In speaking of it, Mark
Twain once said: "It is as pathetic a romance as any that has crossed the
field of my personal experience in a long lifetime."--[When Mark Twain:
A Biography was written this letter had not come to light, and the matter
was stated there in accordance with Mark Twain's latest memory of it.]

Howells wrote: "After all, how poor and hackneyed all the inventions are
compared with the simple and stately facts.  Who could have imagined such
a heart-break as that?  Yet it went along with the fulfillment of
everyday duty and made no more noise than a grave under foot.  I doubt if
fiction will ever get the knack of such things."

Jane Clemens now lived with her son Orion and his wife, in Keokuk, where
she was more contented than elsewhere.  In these later days her memory
had become erratic, her realization of events about her uncertain, but
there were times when she was quite her former self, remembering clearly
and talking with her old-time gaiety of spirit.  Mark Twain frequently
sent her playful letters to amuse her, letters full of such boyish gaiety
as had amused her long years before.  The one that follows is a fair
example.  It was written after a visit which Clemens and his family had
paid to Keokuk.


                       To Jane Clemens, in Keokuk:

                                             ELMIRA, Aug. 7, '86.
DEAR MA,--I heard that Molly and Orion and Pamela had been sick, but I
see by your letter that they are much better now, or nearly well.  When
we visited you a month ago, it seemed to us that your Keokuk weather was
pretty hot; Jean and Clara sat up in bed at Mrs. McElroy's and cried
about it, and so did I; but I judge by your letter that it has cooled
down, now, so that a person is comparatively comfortable, with his skin
off.  Well it did need cooling; I remember that I burnt a hole in my
shirt, there, with some ice cream that fell on it; and Miss Jenkins told
me they never used a stove, but cooked their meals on a marble-topped
table in the drawing-room, just with the natural heat.  If anybody else
had told me, I would not have believed it.  I was told by the Bishop of
Keokuk that he did not allow crying at funerals, because it scalded the
furniture.  If Miss Jenkins had told me that, I would have believed it.
This reminds me that you speak of Dr. Jenkins and his family as if they
were strangers to me.  Indeed they are not.  Don't you suppose I remember
gratefully how tender the doctor was with Jean when she hurt her arm, and
how quickly he got the pain out of the hurt, whereas I supposed it was
going to last at least an hour?  No, I don't forget some things as easily
as I do others.

Yes, it was pretty hot weather.  Now here, when a person is going to die,
he is always in a sweat about where he is going to; but in Keokuk of
course they don't care, because they are fixed for everything.  It has
set me reflecting, it has taught me a lesson.  By and by, when my health
fails, I am going to put all my affairs in order, and bid good-bye to my
friends here, and kill all the people I don't like, and go out to Keokuk
and prepare for death.

They are all well in this family, and we all send love.
                                   Affly Your Son
                                                  SAM.


     The ways of city officials and corporations are often past
     understanding, and Mark Twain sometimes found it necessary to write
     picturesque letters of protest.  The following to a Hartford
     lighting company is a fair example of these documents.


           To a gas and electric-lighting company, in Hartford:

GENTLEMEN,--There are but two places in our whole street where lights
could be of any value, by any accident, and you have measured and
appointed your intervals so ingeniously as to leave each of those places
in the centre of a couple of hundred yards of solid darkness.  When I
noticed that you were setting one of your lights in such a way that I
could almost see how to get into my gate at night, I suspected that it
was a piece of carelessness on the part of the workmen, and would be
corrected as soon as you should go around inspecting and find it out.
My judgment was right; it is always right, when you axe concerned.  For
fifteen years, in spite of my prayers and tears, you persistently kept a
gas lamp exactly half way between my gates, so that I couldn't find
either of them after dark; and then furnished such execrable gas that I
had to hang a danger signal on the lamp post to keep teams from running
into it, nights.  Now I suppose your present idea is, to leave us a
little more in the dark.

Don't mind us--out our way; we possess but one vote apiece, and no rights
which you are in any way bound to respect.  Please take your electric
light and go to--but never mind, it is not for me to suggest; you will
probably find the way; and any way you can reasonably count on divine
assistance if you lose your bearings.

                                   S. L. CLEMENS.

     [Etext Editor's Note: Twain wrote another note to Hartford Gas and
     Electric, which he may not have mailed and which Paine does not
     include in these volumes:
     "Gentleman:--Someday you are going to move me almost to the point
     of irritation with your God-damned chuckle headed fashion of
     turning off your God-damned gas without giving notice to your
     God-damned parishioners--and you did it again last night--"
     D.W.]

     Frequently Clemens did not send letters of this sort after they were
     written.  Sometimes he realized the uselessness of such protest,
     sometimes the mere writing of them had furnished the necessary
     relief, and he put, the letter away, or into the wastebasket, and
     wrote something more temperate, or nothing at all.  A few such
     letters here follow.

     Clemens was all the time receiving application from people who
     wished him to recommend one article or another; books, plays,
     tobacco, and what not.  They were generally persistent people,
     unable to accept a polite or kindly denial.  Once he set down some
     remarks on this particular phase of correspondence.  He wrote:


I

No doubt Mr. Edison has been offered a large interest in many and many an
electrical project, for the use of his name to float it withal.  And no
doubt all men who have achieved for their names, in any line of activity
whatever, a sure market value, have been familiar with this sort of
solicitation.  Reputation is a hall-mark: it can remove doubt from pure
silver, and it can also make the plated article pass for pure.

And so, people without a hall-mark of their own are always trying to get
the loan of somebody else's.

As a rule, that kind of a person sees only one side of the case.  He sees
that his invention or his painting or his book is--apparently--a trifle
better than you yourself can do, therefore why shouldn't you be willing
to put your hall-mark on it?  You will be giving the purchaser his full
money's worth; so who is hurt, and where is the harm?  Besides, are you
not helping a struggling fellow-craftsman, and is it not your duty to do
that?

That side is plenty clear enough to him, but he can't and won't see the
other side, to-wit: that you are a rascal if you put your hall-mark upon
a thing which you did not produce yourself, howsoever good it may be.
How simple that is; and yet there are not two applicants in a hundred who
can, be made to see it.

When one receives an application of this sort, his first emotion is an
indignant sense of insult; his first deed is the penning of a sharp
answer.  He blames nobody but that other person.  That person is a very
base being; he must be; he would degrade himself for money, otherwise it
would not occur to him that you would do such a thing.  But all the same,
that application has done its work, and taken you down in your own
estimation.  You recognize that everybody hasn't as high an opinion of
you as you have of yourself; and in spite of you there ensues an interval
during which you are not, in your own estimation as fine a bird as you
were before.

However, being old and experienced, you do not mail your sharp letter,
but leave it lying a day.  That saves you.  For by that time you have
begun to reflect that you are a person who deals in exaggerations--and
exaggerations are lies.  You meant yours to be playful, and thought you
made them unmistakably so.  But you couldn't make them playfulnesses to a
man who has no sense of the playful and can see nothing but the serious
side of things.  You rattle on quite playfully, and with measureless
extravagance, about how you wept at the tomb of Adam; and all in good
time you find to your astonishment that no end of people took you at your
word and believed you.  And presently they find out that you were not in
earnest.  They have been deceived; therefore, (as they argue--and there
is a sort of argument in it,) you are a deceiver.  If you will deceive in
one way, why shouldn't you in another?  So they apply for the use of your
trade-mark.  You are amazed and affronted.  You retort that you are not
that kind of person.  Then they are amazed and affronted; and wonder
"since when?"

By this time you have got your bearings.  You realize that perhaps there
is a little blame on both sides.  You are in the right frame, now.  So
you write a letter void of offense, declining.  You mail this one; you
pigeon-hole the other.

That is, being old and experienced, you do, but early in your career, you
don't: you mail the first one.


II

An enthusiast who had a new system of musical notation, wrote to me and
suggested that a magazine article from me, contrasting the absurdities of
the old system with the simplicities of his new one, would be sure to
make a "rousing hit."  He shouted and shouted over the marvels wrought by
his system, and quoted the handsome compliments which had been paid it by
famous musical people; but he forgot to tell me what his notation was
like, or what its simplicities consisted in.  So I could not have written
the article if I had wanted to--which I didn't; because I hate strangers
with axes to grind.  I wrote him a courteous note explaining how busy I
was--I always explain how busy I am--and casually drooped this remark:

"I judge the X-X notation to be a rational mode of representing music, in
place of the prevailing fashion, which was the invention of an idiot."

Next mail he asked permission to print that meaningless remark.
I answered, no--courteously, but still, no; explaining that I could not
afford to be placed in the attitude of trying to influence people with a
mere worthless guess.  What a scorcher I got, next mail!  Such irony!
such sarcasm, such caustic praise of my superhonorable loyalty to the
public!  And withal, such compassion for my stupidity, too, in not being
able to understand my own language.  I cannot remember the words of this
letter broadside, but there was about a page used up in turning this idea
round and round and exposing it in different lights.

                             Unmailed Answer:

DEAR SIR,--What is the trouble with you?  If it is your viscera, you
cannot have them taken out and reorganized a moment too soon.  I mean,
if they are inside.  But if you are composed of them, that is another
matter.  Is it your brain?  But it could not be your brain.  Possibly it
is your skull: you want to look out for that.  Some people, when they get
an idea, it pries the structure apart.  Your system of notation has got
in there, and couldn't find room, without a doubt that is what the
trouble is.  Your skull was not made to put ideas in, it was made to
throw potatoes at.
                         Yours Truly.


                              Mailed Answer:

DEAR SIR,--Come, come--take a walk; you disturb the children.
                         Yours Truly.


There was a day, now happily nearly over, when certain newspapers made a
practice of inviting men distinguished in any walk of life to give their
time and effort without charge to express themselves on some subject of
the day, or perhaps they were asked to send their favorite passages in
prose or verse, with the reasons why.  Such symposiums were "features"
that cost the newspapers only the writing of a number of letters,
stationery, and postage.  To one such invitation Mark Twain wrote two
replies.  They follow herewith:

                             Unmailed Answer:

DEAR SIR,--I have received your proposition--which you have imitated from
a pauper London periodical which had previously imitated the idea of this
sort of mendicancy from seventh-rate American journalism, where it
originated as a variation of the inexpensive "interview."

Why do you buy Associated Press dispatches?  To make your paper the more
salable, you answer.  But why don't you try to beg them?  Why do you
discriminate?  I can sell my stuff; why should I give it to you?  Why
don't you ask me for a shirt?  What is the difference between asking me
for the worth of a shirt and asking me for the shirt itself?  Perhaps you
didn't know you were begging.  I would not use that argument--it makes
the user a fool.  The passage of poetry--or prose, if you will--which has
taken deepest root in my thought, and which I oftenest return to and
dwell upon with keenest no matter what, is this:  That the proper place
for journalists who solicit literary charity is on the street corner with
their hats in their hands.


                              Mailed Answer:

DEAR SIR,--Your favor of recent date is received, but I am obliged by
press of work to decline.


     The manager of a traveling theatrical company wrote that he had
     taken the liberty of dramatizing Tom Sawyer, and would like also the
     use of the author's name--the idea being to convey to the public
     that it was a Mark Twain play.  In return for this slight favor the
     manager sent an invitation for Mark Twain to come and see the play--
     to be present on the opening night, as it were, at his (the
     manager's) expense.  He added that if the play should be a go in the
     cities there might be some "arrangement" of profits.  Apparently
     these inducements did not appeal to Mark Twain.  The long unmailed
     reply is the more interesting, but probably the briefer one that
     follows it was quite as effective.

                             Unmailed Answer:

                                             HARTFORD, Sept. 8, '87.
DEAR SIR,--And so it has got around to you, at last; and you also have
"taken the liberty."  You are No. 1365.  When 1364 sweeter and better
people, including the author, have "tried" to dramatize Tom Sawyer and
did not arrive, what sort of show do you suppose you stand?  That is a
book, dear sir, which cannot be dramatized.  One might as well try to
dramatize any other hymn.  Tom Sawyer is simply a hymn, put into prose
form to give it a worldly air.

Why the pale doubt that flitteth dim and nebulous athwart the forecastle
of your third sentence?  Have no fears.  Your piece will be a Go.
It will go out the back door on the first night.  They've all done it
--the 1364.  So will 1365.  Not one of us ever thought of the simple
device of half-soling himself with a stove-lid.  Ah, what suffering a
little hindsight would have saved us.  Treasure this hint.

How kind of you to invite me to the funeral.  Go to; I have attended a
thousand of them.  I have seen Tom Sawyer's remains in all the different
kinds of dramatic shrouds there are.  You cannot start anything fresh.
Are you serious when you propose to pay my expence--if that is the
Susquehannian way of spelling it?  And can you be aware that I charge a
hundred dollars a mile when I travel for pleasure?  Do you realize that
it is 432 miles to Susquehanna?  Would it be handy for you to send me the
$43,200 first, so I could be counting it as I come along; because
railroading is pretty dreary to a sensitive nature when there's nothing
sordid to buck at for Zeitvertreib.

Now as I understand it, dear and magnanimous 1365, you are going to
recreate Tom Sawyer dramatically, and then do me the compliment to put me
in the bills as father of this shady offspring.  Sir, do you know that
this kind of a compliment has destroyed people before now?  Listen.

Twenty-four years ago, I was strangely handsome.  The remains of it are
still visible through the rifts of time.  I was so handsome that human
activities ceased as if spellbound when I came in view, and even
inanimate things stopped to look--like locomotives, and district
messenger boys and so-on.  In San Francisco, in the rainy season I was
often mistaken for fair weather.  Upon one occasion I was traveling in
the Sonora region, and stopped for an hour's nooning, to rest my horse
and myself.  All the town came out to look.  The tribes of Indians
gathered to look.  A Piute squaw named her baby for me,--a voluntary
compliment which pleased me greatly.  Other attentions were paid me.
Last of all arrived the president and faculty of Sonora University and
offered me the post of Professor of Moral Culture and the Dogmatic
Humanities; which I accepted gratefully, and entered at once upon my
duties.  But my name had pleased the Indians, and in the deadly kindness
of their hearts they went on naming their babies after me.  I tried to
stop it, but the Indians could not understand why I should object to so
manifest a compliment.  The thing grew and grew and spread and spread and
became exceedingly embarrassing.  The University stood it a couple of
years; but then for the sake of the college they felt obliged to call a
halt, although I had the sympathy of the whole faculty.  The president
himself said to me, "I am as sorry as I can be for you, and would still
hold out if there were any hope ahead; but you see how it is: there are a
hundred and thirty-two of them already, and fourteen precincts to hear
from.  The circumstance has brought your name into most wide and
unfortunate renown.  It causes much comment--I believe that that is not
an over-statement.  Some of this comment is palliative, but some of it
--by patrons at a distance, who only know the statistics without the
explanation,--is offensive, and in some cases even violent.  Nine
students have been called home.  The trustees of the college have been
growing more and more uneasy all these last months--steadily along with
the implacable increase in your census--and I will not conceal from you
that more than once they have touched upon the expediency of a change in
the Professorship of Moral Culture.  The coarsely sarcastic editorial in
yesterday's Alta, headed Give the Moral Acrobat a Rest--has brought
things to a crisis, and I am charged with the unpleasant duty of
receiving your resignation."

I know you only mean me a kindness, dear 1365, but it is a most deadly
mistake.  Please do not name your Injun for me.  Truly Yours.


                              Mailed Answer:

                                        NEW YORK, Sept. 8.  1887.
DEAR SIR,--Necessarily I cannot assent to so strange a proposition.  And
I think it but fair to warn you that if you put the piece on the stage,
you must take the legal consequences.
                         Yours respectfully,
                                   S. L. CLEMENS.


     Before the days of international copyright no American author's
     books were pirated more freely by Canadian publishers than those of
     Mark Twain.  It was always a sore point with him that these books,
     cheaply printed, found their way into the United States, and were
     sold in competition with his better editions.  The law on the
     subject seemed to be rather hazy, and its various interpretations
     exasperating.  In the next unmailed letter Mark Twain relieves
     himself to a misguided official.  The letter is worth reading today,
     if for no other reason, to show the absurdity of copyright
     conditions which prevailed at that time.


          Unmailed Letter to H. C. Christiancy, on book Piracy:

                                             HARTFORD, Dec. 18, '87.
H. C. CHRISTIANCY, ESQ.

DEAR SIR,--As I understand it, the position of the U. S. Government is
this: If a person be captured on the border with counterfeit bonds in his
hands--bonds of the N. Y. Central Railway, for instance--the procedure in
his case shall be as follows:

1.  If the N. Y. C. have not previously filed in the several police
offices along the border, proof of ownership of the originals of the
bonds, the government officials must collect a duty on the counterfeits,
and then let them go ahead and circulate in this country.

2.  But if there is proof already on file, then the N. Y. C.  may pay the
duty and take the counterfeits.

But in no case will the United States consent to go without its share of
the swag.  It is delicious.  The biggest and proudest government on earth
turned sneak-thief; collecting pennies on stolen property, and pocketing
them with a greasy and libidinous leer; going into partnership with
foreign thieves to rob its own children; and when the child escapes the
foreigner, descending to the abysmal baseness of hanging on and robbing
the infant all alone by itself!  Dear sir, this is not any more
respectable than for a father to collect toll on the forced prostitution
of his own daughter; in fact it is the same thing.  Upon these terms,
what is a U. S. custom house but a "fence?"  That is all it is: a
legalized trader in stolen goods.

And this nasty law, this filthy law, this unspeakable law calls itself a
"regulation for the protection of owners of copyright!"  Can sarcasm go
further than that?  In what way does it protect them?  Inspiration itself
could not furnish a rational answer to that question.  Whom does it
protect, then?  Nobody, as far as I can see, but the foreign thief-
sometimes--and his fellow-footpad the U. S. government, all the time.
What could the Central Company do with the counterfeit bonds after it had
bought them of the star spangled banner Master-thief?  Sell them at a
dollar apiece and fetch down the market for the genuine hundred-dollar
bond?  What could I do with that 20-cent copy of "Roughing It" which the
United States has collared on the border and is waiting to release to me
for cash in case I am willing to come down to its moral level and help
rob myself?  Sell it at ten or fifteen cents--duty added--and destroy the
market for the original $3,50 book?  Who ever did invent that law?  I
would like to know the name of that immortal jackass.

Dear sir, I appreciate your courtesy in stretching your authority in the
desire to do me a kindness, and I sincerely thank you for it.  But I have
no use for that book; and if I were even starving for it I would not pay
duty on in either to get it or suppress it.  No doubt there are ways in
which I might consent to go into partnership with thieves and fences,
but this is not one of them.  This one revolts the remains of my self-
respect; turns my stomach.  I think I could companion with a highwayman
who carried a shot-gun and took many risks; yes, I think I should like
that if I were younger; but to go in with a big rich government that robs
paupers, and the widows and orphans of paupers and takes no risk--why the
thought just gags me.

Oh, no, I shall never pay any duties on pirated books of mine.  I am much
too respectable for that--yet awhile.  But here--one thing that grovels
me is this: as far as I can discover--while freely granting that the
U. S. copyright laws are far and away the most idiotic that exist
anywhere on the face of the earth--they don't authorize the government to
admit pirated books into this country, toll or no toll.  And so I think
that that regulation is the invention of one of those people--as a rule,
early stricken of God, intellectually--the departmental interpreters of
the laws, in Washington.  They can always be depended on to take any
reasonably good law and interpret the common sense all out of it.  They
can be depended on, every time, to defeat a good law, and make it
inoperative--yes, and utterly grotesque, too, mere matter for laughter
and derision.  Take some of the decisions of the Post-office Department,
for instance--though I do not mean to suggest that that asylum is any
worse than the others for the breeding and nourishing of incredible
lunatics--I merely instance it because it happens to be the first to come
into my mind.  Take that case of a few years ago where the P. M. General
suddenly issued an edict requiring you to add the name of the State after
Boston, New York, Chicago, &c, in your superscriptions, on pain of having
your letter stopped and forwarded to the dead-letter office; yes, and I
believe he required the county, too.  He made one little concession in
favor of New York: you could say "New York City," and stop there; but if
you left off the "city," you must add "N. Y."  to your "New York."  Why,
it threw the business of the whole country into chaos and brought
commerce almost to a stand-still.  Now think of that!  When that man goes
to--to--well, wherever he is going to--we shan't want the microscopic
details of his address.  I guess we can find him.

Well, as I was saying, I believe that this whole paltry and ridiculous
swindle is a pure creation of one of those cabbages that used to be at
the head of one of those Retreats down there--Departments, you know--and
that you will find it so, if you will look into it.  And moreover--but
land, I reckon we are both tired by this time.
                              Truly Yours,
                                             MARK TWAIN.

